But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,
If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
  This were to be new made when thou art old,
  And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.
Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
  But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive:
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
  But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet,
In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
Ten times thy self were happier than thou art,
Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
  Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
  So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon:
  Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son.
Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear. 
  Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.'
That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many,
But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate,
That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind:
As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st,
In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st,
Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest,
Without this folly, age, and cold decay:
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
  Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert'; 
Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
And for a woman wert thou first created;
As any mother's child, though not so bright
So long as youth and thou are of one date;
How can I then be elder than thou art?
  Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.
After a thousand victories once foil'd,
In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it:
  Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
For then my thoughts--from far where I abide--
And each, though enemies to either's reign,
I tell the day, to please him thou art bright,
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
And all those friends which I thought buried.
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
  And thou--all they--hast all the all of me.
If thou survive my well-contented day,
And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
O! then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
No more be griev'd at that which thou hast done:
Although our undivided loves are one:
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
  As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse
When thou thy self dost give invention light? 
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
When thou art all the better part of me?
That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone.
O absence! what a torment wouldst thou prove,
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive, 
  And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more.
Then, if for my love, thou my love receivest,
I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest;
But yet be blam'd, if thou thy self deceivest
Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assail'd;
Ay me! but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:--
That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her;
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.
No matter then although my foot did stand
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
But, ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
The first my thought, the other my desire,
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,--
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart;
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
Thou best of dearest, and mine only care,
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
  And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear,
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass,
  To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
From where thou art why should I haste me thence?
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind,
So, love, be thou, although to-day thou fill
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
  Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Without accusing you of injury. 
  I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:
  For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:
  This thought is as a death which cannot choose
Without all ornament, itself and true,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;
Then--churls--their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
  The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.
That thou art blam'd shall not be thy defect,
So thou be good, slander doth but approve
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days
  Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
That time of year thou mayst in me behold
In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire,
  This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
  To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.
Without all bail shall carry me away,
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste. 
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
  These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
  But thou art all my art, and dost advance
  Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
I grant thou wert not married to my Muse,
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathiz'd
I found, or thought I found, you did exceed
